# Diversity at ShopBlock
Our team comes from a variety of locations ranging from India, Canada, USA, Uruguay to Slovakia. Having worked in Toronto, Edinburgh and Bratislava, we gained professional experience in a range of locations. We bring together various racial identities and speak five languages at a professional and another four at an informal level.

## Team Expertise
Our skill sets are complementary. We are comfortable developing both mobile and web apps. We are also able to work with data and train machine learning models with ease.
- Alex provides us with strong backend and infrastructure knowledge. He has deployed his own web projects and used a variety of Python libraries such as Numpy, Pandas and Tensorflow.
- Filip brings with him a strong frontend experience in React and strong data analysis skills. He has previously designed and deployed his own web applications, as well as created APIs in JavaScript. 
- Kirby provides a strong frontend experience in React and a fair experience with embedded programming in React Native. His prior skills in creating web applications and designing cross-platform apps can help in the team establishing development goals.
## Lack of Expertise

(Identify where your team's backgrounds and expertise are not enough for this project)
The overlap in our skill sets reduces technical diversity. In the context of our project, this leads to insufficiencies in matters relating to DevOps, blockchain development, software security and software development in the context of startups.
We do not have sufficient experience in DevOps and lack familiarity with CI/CD pipelines. Importantly, we lack expertise in programming with blockchain and it serves as a learning curve for all three developers. Furthermore, we are all quite limited in our knowledge of software security as it pertains to embedded programming, which can be a critical flaw since our startup seeks to ensure privacy over data collection and usage.
While we do have ample experience participating in software projects through internships, personal side projects, and school assignments, we have not created projects with the intention of piloting our own startup. As a result, we can potentially overlook important aspects of a business such as an effective product marketing strategy. For instance, we may be limited in our blockchain vocabulary when developing effective SEO keywords, which may risk ShopBlock being portrayed as unprofessional.

## Subject Matter Experts
With the help of the teaching team, the team at Dandelion and online resources, we believe we can overcome the gaps in our expertise. To address the lack of familiarity with CI/CD, we can consult Julian, who worked as a software engineer at GitHub and is an expert in the GitHub Actions Deploy process. To answer questions related to creating distributed apps on the blockchain, we can approach our teaching assistant Deepkamal. In addition, we might be able to reach out to Alex Munro and Paul Chafe, the CEO and CTO of Dandelion, who can provide further valuable insight into Blockchain-as-a-Service ventures. We may find help with issues of security on mobile applications through online resources such as OWASP or professor Kazakevich, who specializes in web technologies. Finally, we can consult both Mario and Julian on tips for business leadership, techniques on working within and running an efficient team as well as marketing insights.

## Lack of Diversity
Our development team consists of abled, right-handed, male computer science undergraduates in their early 20s. This affects our ability to represent key demographics that will interact with our platform, which could be detrimental to our platform. When we think about the people who might use our blockchain-based platform for loyalty programs, we likely imagine a young person. Contrary to this belief, a 2020 UK [customer survey by dunnhumby Beyond](https://www-statista-com.myaccess.library.utoronto.ca/statistics/1125656/loyalty-card-usage-rate-for-shopping-for-snacks-in-the-uk-by-age/) showed that people over 65 are most likely to use a loyalty program when shopping for snacks and meals. In fact, they are almost _twice_ as likely to do so than people 18-24 years of age. This surprising statistic shows that the structure of our user base might divert from our expectations. It also tells us that we might be unable to represent a key portion of our user base. Therefore, when planning, we should base our decisions on data rather than assumptions; when testing the product with users, we must ensure to work with a representative example of our user base. 
In addition, we are all right-handed. This might affect how we design the UI. It could lead to improper positioning of UI elements such as dropdowns for left-handed people. To prevent this, we will have to take care in designing the interface and run our prototypes by left-handed folks. Further building on the notion of accessibility, we are all abled. However, it is important to keep accessibility in mind so as not to exclude users who could benefit from our platform. The end user-facing part of our platform will be web-based, and so we should aim to design our interface with [Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG)](https://www.w3.org/WAI/standards-guidelines/wcag/glance/) in mind. For instance, we can make use of aria-labels to make the interfaces readable by assistive technology. To verify WCAG compliance, we could use an automated service such as [accessiBe](https://accessibe.com/).
If we fail to cater to the needs of our user base, we risk user frustration. This could lead to bad press and deter businesses from using our platform. Naturally, this would put the development team under pressure and cause tensions. Ultimately, a bad reputation would put ShopBlock at risk of failing.

### Importance of Diverse Interaction
Exposure to varied groups of people greatly helps us identify missed opportunities and potential pain points in the adoption of our product. For instance, from the perspective of three people living in urban areas, it is difficult for us to imagine accessibility issues that result from having absent infrastructure or sources of information. In considering a wide demographic of consumers, we will also accommodate individuals with less technological literacy. Such market feedback is critical in helping us refine our platform to address issues and refine the platform.

## Unconscious Bias

### Conformity Bias
We identified various biases that may impact our collaboration. Firstly, we may be susceptible to Conformity bias. We are a team of three developers only. It is not unlikely that two of us will agree and one disagree. Conformity bias tells us that the third developer might change their opinion to align with others. However, this could make us lose valuable opinions. To prevent this, we must keep in mind that we have a similar level of seniority. Therefore, our individual opinions have similar authority. In addition, given the small size of our team, the agreement of the majority does not guarantee that the decision being made is correct.

### Similarity Bias
Besides similar levels of seniority, we have overlapping skill sets. Similarity bias tells us that since we are similar, we might be viewing each other as better. For example, Kirby and Filip both have experience with React. Filip might think that Kirby is more experienced with React owing to his experience developing a full-stack website on his own, while Filip’s efforts were mostly team-based. By contrast, Kirby might think that Filip is more seasoned in React because he has worked with Redux, a tool often used in complex React projects. Expecting the experience of others to be more valuable than ours might lead to hesitation in taking up tasks, causing frustration when distributing work. To prevent this, we should keep in mind that our strong profiles and the fact that we were hand-picked for this course indicate that we are all capable of doing a good job.

### Confirmation Bias
When developing the ShopBlock platform, we must pay special attention to Confirmation bias. During our internships, we worked at large companies with established user bases; during our personal projects, uptake was not the main focus. The experience this course brings is different in that we will work on a novel idea and try to sell it in a well-established industry. We strongly believe in its potential, and we will look for evidence to support this. However, we should remember that we do not actually _know_ if it will work out. Challenging our beliefs could expose shortcomings in our proposed solution. Therefore, we should be open to feedback and particularly sensitive to signs that the idea might fail. Tying into the Sunk Cost Fallacy, if it becomes apparent that we are building a service that no one will buy, we should bring this up as soon as possible and seriously consider focussing on a different industry.

### Halo and Horns Effect
Finally, we are all new to each other, and so we are still developing a professional relationship. This early on, it is easy to develop a positive or negative outlook on each other’s work based on how it aligns with our initial expectations. The Halo and Horns Effect respectively tell us that this could lead us to over- or underestimate each other’s abilities. In the extreme case, developing a fixed outlook on each other’s abilities could lead to frustration and unequal division of work, and finally a sense of distrust within our team. To avoid this, we must keep in mind that we are all capable individuals who can act on feedback; to this end, we should articulate our feedback.

### Conclusion
In short, we intend to keep the following in mind:
- To fight Conformity bias, we should speak our mind even if others might disagree. We have similar levels of experience and so our opinions have similar authority.
- To fight Similarity bias, we should remember that we are highly-motivated individuals who were hand-picked for this course. We are capable of tackling challenges and doing a good job.
- To fight Confirmation bias, we should be open to changing our vision in light of evidence, and doing so earlier rather than later.
- To fight the Halo and Horns effect, we should maintain a critical outlook on each other’s work and give feedback.
